# Books Like... Master List — 291 Pages
*Filtered: only entries where someone would search "books like X" having read ONLY that book*

---

## TIER 1 — Write First (54 pages)
*Highest traffic, weakest competition — these drive 80% of organic traffic*

### Romantasy & BookTok (18)
1. ✅✅ Books like Fourth Wing
2. ✅✅ Books like ACOTAR (A Court of Thorns and Roses)
3. ✅✅Books like From Blood and Ash
4. ✅ Books like Iron Flame
5. ✅ Books like A Court of Silver Flames
6. ✅ Books like Throne of Glass
7. ✅✅ Books like Kingdom of the Wicked
8. ✅ Books like Crescent City
9. ✅ Books like Onyx Storm
10. ✅✅ Books like The Cruel Prince
11. ✅ Books like House of Flame and Shadow
12. ✅✅ Books like The Bridge Kingdom
13. ✅ Books like A Touch of Darkness
14. ✅ Books like The Plated Prisoner (Raven Kennedy)
15. ✅ Books like Powerless (Lauren Roberts)
16. ✅ Books like When the Moon Hatched
17. ✅ Books like Divine Rivals (Rebecca Ross)
18. ✅ Books like Outlander

### Epic Fantasy Pillars (13)
19. ✅✅ Books like Mistborn / The Final Empire
20. ✅✅ Books like The Way of Kings
21. ✅✅Books like The Name of the Wind
22. ✅ Books like The Lord of the Rings
23. ✅ Books like A Game of Thrones
24. ✅ Books like The Wheel of Time
25. ✅ Books like The Hobbit
26. ✅ Books like Warbreaker
27. ✅ Books like Elantris
28. ✅ Books like Dune
29. ✅ Books like The Witcher
30. ✅ Books like Malazan / Gardens of the Moon
31. ✅ Books like Discworld / Terry Pratchett

### Fantasy Crossover, Dark & High-Volume (23)
32. ✅✅ Books like Six of Crows
33. ✅ Books like Red Rising
34. ✅ Books like The Poppy War
35. ✅ Books like Piranesi
36. ✅ Books like The Night Circus
37. ✅ Books like Circe
38. ✅ Books like The House in the Cerulean Sea
39. ✅ Books like Legends & Lattes
40. ✅ Books like The Goblin Emperor
41. ✅ Books like Uprooted
42. ✅ Books like Spinning Silver
43. ✅ Books like American Gods
44. ✅ Books like The Blade Itself
45. ✅ Books like Best Served Cold
46. ✅ Books like Assassin's Apprentice
47. ✅ Books like Good Omens
48. ✅ Books like The Will of the Many
49. ✅ Books like The Fifth Season
50. ✅ Books like Gideon the Ninth
51. ✅ Books like A Deadly Education
52. ✅ Books like The Hunger Games
53. ✅ Books like Twilight
54. ✅ Books like The Dark Tower (Stephen King)

---

## TIER 2 — Within 3 Months (~90 pages)
*Strong search volume, moderate competition, high affiliate potential*

### Grimdark & Dark Fantasy (18)
55. ✅ Books like Prince of Thorns
56. ✅ Books like The Sword of Kaigen
57. ✅ Books like A Little Hatred
58. ✅ Books like The Heroes (Abercrombie)
59. ✅ Books like Red Country
60. ✅ Books like The Black Company
61. ✅ Books like The Darkness That Comes Before
62. ✅ Books like Blood Song
63. Books like The Dragon Republic
64. ✅ Books like Babel
65. ✅ Books like Jade City
66. Books like She Who Became the Sun
67. ✅ Books like The Jasmine Throne
68. Books like The Traitor Baru Cormorant
69. Books like The Book Eaters
70. Books like Mexican Gothic
71. ✅ Books like The Atlas Six
72. Books like Tress of the Emerald Sea

### YA Fantasy & Crossover (14)
73. ✅ Books like Harry Potter
74. ✅ Books like Eragon
75. ✅ Books like Percy Jackson
76. ✅ Books like Shadow and Bone
77. ✅ Books like An Ember in the Ashes
78. ✅ Books like City of Brass
79. ✅ Books like Children of Blood and Bone
80. Books like The Gilded Wolves
81. Books like Fireborne
82. ✅ Books like Daughter of the Moon Goddess
83. Books like Legendborn
84. Books like Skyward (Sanderson)
85. ✅ Books like The Chronicles of Narnia
86. ✅ Books like Sabriel / Old Kingdom (Garth Nix)

### Cozy Fantasy & Heartwarming (14)
87. ✅ Books like A Psalm for the Wild-Built
88. ✅ Books like The Very Secret Society of Irregular Witches
89. ✅ Books like Emily Wilde's Encyclopaedia of Faeries
90. ✅ Books like Witch of Wild Things
91. ✅ Books like Thornhedge
92. Books like Nettle and Bone
93. ✅ Books like Sorcery of Thorns
94. ✅ Books like The Midnight Library
95. Books like The Invisible Library
96. Books like Bookshops and Bonedust
97. Books like The Undertaking of Hart and Mercy
98. Books like Coraline
99. Books like The Graveyard Book
100. Books like Stardust

### Urban & Contemporary Fantasy (9)
101. Books like Neverwhere
102. Books like Anansi Boys
103. ✅ Books like Jonathan Strange and Mr Norrell
104. Books like The Magicians
105. ✅ Books like The Dresden Files
106. Books like Rivers of London
107. Books like Kate Daniels series
108. Books like Burn for Me (Hidden Legacy)
109. Books like Dead Witch Walking / The Hollows

### Sci-Fi Fantasy Crossover (6)
110. Books like Ender's Game
111. Books like Leviathan Wakes / The Expanse
112. Books like Old Man's War
113. Books like Starter Villain
114. Books like The Kaiju Preservation Society
115. Books like The Long Way to a Small Angry Planet

### Classic & Foundational Fantasy (10)
116. ✅ Books like A Wizard of Earthsea
117. Books like The Belgariad (David Eddings)
118. Books like The Sword of Truth (Terry Goodkind)
119. Books like The Once and Future King
120. Books like Nine Princes in Amber
121. Books like Tigana
122. Books like The Lions of Al-Rassan
123. Books like The Silmarillion
124. Books like The Crystal Cave
125. Books like Mists of Avalon

### Romantasy & BookTok Tier 2 (14)
126. Books like Bridgerton / Julia Quinn
127. ✅ Books like House of Salt and Sorrows
128. Books like A Fate Inked in Blood
129. ✅✅ Books like Quicksilver (Callie Hart)
130. Books like Throne of Secrets
131. Books like The Stars Are Dying
132. Books like Bloodguard
133. Books like A Deal with the Elf King
134. Books like Burn of the Everflame
135. ✅ Books like Zodiac Academy
136. Books like One Dark Window
137. Books like Heartless Hunter / Crimson Moth
138. Books like A Study in Drowning
139. Books like Phantasma (Kaylie Smith)

### Additional Series & Standalones (18)
140. ✅ Books like The Lies of Locke Lamora
141. ✅ Books like The Priory of the Orange Tree
142. ✅ Books like Cradle / Unsouled
143. ✅ Books like A Memory Called Empire
144. Books like The Hundred Thousand Kingdoms
145. ✅ Books like Dungeon Crawler Carl
146. Books like He Who Fights with Monsters
147. Books like All Systems Red / Murderbot Diaries
148. Books like Ship of Magic / Liveship Traders
149. Books like Foundryside / Robert Jackson Bennett
150. Books like Promise of Blood / Powder Mage
151. ✅ Books like Empire of the Vampire
152. ✅ Books like Kings of the Wyld
153. Books like Senlin Ascends
154. Books like The Justice of Kings
155. Books like The Tainted Cup
156. Books like The Black Prism / Lightbringer
157. Books like Mistborn Era 2 / Alloy of Law

### Dark Fantasy & Horror-Adjacent (10)
158. ✅ Books like The Bear and the Nightingale
159. Books like The Rage of Dragons
160. Books like Red Sister
161. Books like The Shadow of the Gods
162. Books like The Bone Ships
163. Books like The Ember Blade
164. Books like Malice (John Gwynne)
165. Books like The Spear Cuts Through Water
166. Books like Gods of Jade and Shadow
167. Books like Kindred (Octavia Butler)

### Trending 2024-2026 (5)
168. Books like Somewhere Beyond the Sea
169. Books like The Familiar (Leigh Bardugo 2024)
170. Books like The Daughters' War
171. Books like The Mercy of Gods
172. Books like Wind and Truth
173. ✅✅ Books like The Serpent & the Wings of Night (Carissa Broadbent) 
174. ✅ Books like Assistant to the Villain (Hannah Nicole Maehrer)
175. ✅ Books like Bride (Ali Hazelwood)
176. Books like In the Lives of Puppets (TJ Klune)

---

### Rule applied
> "Would someone search 'books like [X]' having read ONLY this book, not the rest of the series?"

# Reading Orders — Priority List
*Focus on series where order genuinely matters and readers actively search for guidance*

---

TIER 1 — Build First (15 reading order pages)
Highest search volume, most reader confusion, strongest return on time invested

1 Middle-Earth Reading Order (J.R.R. Tolkien — Middle-earth)

2 Narnia Reading Order (C.S. Lewis)

3 Dark Tower Reading Order (Stephen King)

4 Rick Riordan Reading Order (Rick Riordan — Percy Jackson & mythology)

5 Shadowhunter Chronicles Reading Order (Cassandra Clare)

Massive expanded universe — 6+ series, all interconnected, all set in the same world of Shadowhunters (Nephilim) hunting demons alongside warlocks, vampires, faeries, and werewolves
Entry point: City of Bones (The Mortal Instruments #1) — start here, no exceptions; everything else assumes this foundation
The Mortal Instruments (6 books, complete): City of Bones → City of Ashes → City of Glass → City of Fallen Angels → City of Lost Souls → City of Heavenly Fire — the main series, contemporary New York
The Infernal Devices (3 books, complete): Clockwork Angel → Clockwork Prince → Clockwork Princess — Victorian London prequel; widely considered the best series in the universe; read after TMI books 1–3
The Dark Artifices (3 books, complete): Lady Midnight → Lord of Chaos → Queen of Air and Darkness — direct sequel to TMI, new lead cast
The Last Hours (3 books, complete): Chain of Gold → Chain of Iron → Chain of Thorns — 1903, children of TID characters
The Eldest Curses (3 books): Magnus Bane and Alec Lightwood storyline, crossover-heavy; for established fans of the universe
Clary and Jace's story ends at City of Heavenly Fire; later series expand the world laterally, not linearly
Slug: /reading-orders/shadowhunter-chronicles


6 Outlander Reading Order (Diana Gabaldon)

9 main books published (series ongoing — book 10 planned but unannounced): Outlander → Dragonfly in Amber → Voyager → Drums of Autumn → The Fiery Cross → A Breath of Snow and Ashes → An Echo in the Bone → Written in My Own Heart's Blood → Go Tell the Bees That I Am Gone
The premise: Claire Randall, a WWII combat nurse on holiday in Scotland in 1945, touches a standing stone at Craigh na Dun and is thrown back to 1743 — Jacobite Scotland, weeks before the Battle of Culloden; she encounters Jamie Fraser, a Highland warrior; the series becomes a time-crossing love story spanning 250 years of Atlantic history
The genre is genuinely hybrid — historical fiction, romance, adventure, time travel, and war novel in proportions that shift across the series; Gabaldon describes it as "historical fiction with romantic elements and a little time-travel" — it is not primarily a romance despite BookTok positioning
The books are long (800–1,500 pages each) and grow longer as the series progresses; The Fiery Cross (book 5) is widely considered the hardest to get through — 979 pages largely set on a single journey; readers should know this before they hit it
Dragonfly in Amber (book 2) opens 20 years after book 1 without explanation — this is deliberate; do not skip to book 3; the structure pays off by the end of book 2
The series spans Scotland (books 1–2), France, the Colonies/American Revolution (books 4–8), and across three centuries of history

Lord John Grey series (4 novels + novellas):
Lord John and the Private Matter (2003) → Lord John and the Brotherhood of the Blade (2007) → The Scottish Prisoner (2011) → Lord John and the Haunted Soldier
Also: Lord John and the Hand of Devils (novella collection); "Virgins" and other short stories in Seven Stones to Stand or Fall (2017)
Can you skip Lord John? Largely yes — the main series is self-contained; however The Scottish Prisoner contains material and backstory that appears in An Echo in the Bone (book 7); readers who love Lord John specifically should read The Scottish Prisoner before or alongside book 7
Short stories: Seven Stones to Stand or Fall (2017) collects 7 stories and novellas including "Virgins" (a young Jamie Fraser prequel) — best read between book 1 and 2 or after the main series; they add context but are not required
The Outlandish Companion (2 volumes): non-fiction companion books — genealogies, character guides, Gabaldon's notes; for dedicated readers only, not part of the story
Recommended order for new readers: read the 9 main novels in order; revisit Lord John Grey novellas after you know and love the character from the main series; slot Seven Stones to Stand or Fall anywhere after book 3
Slug: /reading-orders/outlander


7 The Expanse Reading Order (James S.A. Corey)

9 books, complete: Leviathan Wakes → Caliban's War → Abaddon's Gate → Cibola Burn → Nemesis Games → Babylon's Ashes → Persepolis Rising → Tiamat's Wrath → Leviathan Falls
James S.A. Corey is a pen name for Daniel Abraham and Ty Franck; the series was co-written across 10 years and is complete — no further main series books planned
The setting: a few hundred years from now, humans have colonized the solar system but have not left it; three major factions — Earth (UN, powerful but overpopulated), Mars (MCRN, disciplined military colony), and the Belt (asteroid belt miners, underpaid, marginalized, their own creole language and culture); the discovery of a protomolecule — alien technology buried on Phoebe moon — changes everything
Book 1 (Leviathan Wakes) works as a complete standalone — a detective story and a first-contact horror story layered together; the rest of the series follows from its events
The series escalates enormously in scope across 9 books — Leviathan Wakes is local (one station, one ship); by books 7–9 the stakes are civilizational and cosmic
The cast is an ensemble but the central crew of the Rocinante (Holden, Naomi, Amos, Alex) carries continuity across all 9 books; POV chapters outside the crew expand in the middle books

Novellas (all collected in Memory's Legion, 2022 — the definitive edition):
Drive: very short — the invention of the Epstein Drive that makes the setting possible; optional, fun for world-building context; read before book 1
The Butcher of Anderson Station: Fred Johnson backstory (appears prominently in book 1); read before or immediately after Leviathan Wakes; adds significant depth to his motivation
Gods of Risk: Bobbie Draper side story set between books 2–3; optional, only essential for Bobbie fans
The Churn: Amos Burton's backstory — his childhood on Earth before the series begins; read before Nemesis Games (book 5) where his past becomes relevant; one of the strongest novellas and worth reading even if you skip the others
The Vital Abyss: side story between Nemesis Games and Babylon's Ashes; optional
Strange Dogs: bridge between books 7–8; optional
Auberon: side story set in the ring gate colony worlds; optional
The Sins of Our Fathers: epilogue novella set after Leviathan Falls; for readers who want closure beyond the final chapter
Essential novellas: The Butcher of Anderson Station (before or with book 1) and The Churn (before book 5) — the rest are optional enrichment
Reading order recommendation: read books 1–9 in order; slot novellas at the points noted above or read Memory's Legion as a collected edition after finishing the main series
The Amazon Prime TV adaptation (6 seasons, 2015–2022) covers approximately books 1–6 and was cancelled before completing the story; the books resolve everything the show leaves unfinished
Slug: /reading-orders/expanse


8 Folk of the Air / Cruel Prince Reading Order (Holly Black)


9 Locked Tomb Reading Order (Tamsyn Muir)


10 Dungeon Crawler Carl Reading Order (Matt Dinniman)


11 Cradle Reading Order (Will Wight)


12 Red Rising Reading Order (Pierce Brown)


13 Foundation Reading Order (Isaac Asimov)

7-book sci-fi epic — a mathematician predicts the fall of a galactic empire and engineers a plan to shorten the coming dark age from 30,000 years to 1,000
Main trilogy: Foundation → Foundation and Empire → Second Foundation
Later Asimov additions: Foundation's Edge → Foundation and Earth
Prequels (written last, read after): Prelude to Foundation → Forward the Foundation
Publication order is strongly recommended — do not start with the prequels
The prequels were written 30+ years after the original trilogy, for readers who already know the universe; they spoil the original trilogy's biggest reveal if read first
The three original novels are fix-ups: short stories originally published in Astounding Science Fiction (1942–1950), assembled into novels
The Mule (Foundation and Empire, part 2) is the series' single most important wildcard — best encountered in publication order without foreknowledge
Asimov retroactively connected his Robot novels (Caves of Steel, The Naked Sun, Robots of Dawn, Robots and Empire) and Empire novels to the Foundation universe — the Robot series functions as the far prehistory of the same galaxy
Caves of Steel is a standalone detective story in the same universe — safe to read anytime as a light entry point into the Asimov universe
Slug: /reading-orders/foundation


14 Ender's Game Reading Order (Orson Scott Card)

The Ender's Game universe spans four interconnected series covering 3,000+ years of human history — but only the first two or three books are widely essential; the rest are for committed fans

Main Ender sequence (4 books): Ender's Game (1985) → Speaker for the Dead (1986) → Xenocide (1991) → Children of the Mind (1996)
Ender's Game: Andrew "Ender" Wiggin, a child genius, is recruited into a military training program for a war against an alien insectoid species (the Formics); set entirely in Battle School and Command School; the novel has one of the most famous twist endings in all of science fiction — avoid plot summaries before reading
Speaker for the Dead: set 3,000 years after Ender's Game — Ender is now an adult philosopher-historian arriving on a human colony world where a new alien species has been discovered; a completely different register from book 1: slower, morally philosophical, and adult in a way that consistently surprises readers expecting a direct sequel; widely considered Card's best novel
Xenocide and Children of the Mind: Ender's story concludes; the philosophical register intensifies and the plotting becomes more abstract; less recommended — most readers who love books 1–2 stop at Speaker or read Xenocide and consider it optional

Shadow sequence — parallel to book 1, then sequel (6 books): Ender's Shadow → Shadow of the Hegemon → Shadow Puppets → Shadow of the Giant → Shadows in Flight → The Shadow Alive
Ender's Shadow (1999): retells the events of Ender's Game from the perspective of Bean — a street child from Rotterdam recruited alongside Ender who may be smarter than him, and who has a biological secret that distinguishes him; designed to be read alongside or immediately after Ender's Game; complements book 1 rather than replacing it
Shadow of the Hegemon onward: follows Bean and the other Battle School graduates into Earth's immediate aftermath — political maneuvering, the Hegemon's consolidation of power, continental war; where the Ender sequence jumps 3,000 years, the Shadow sequence stays on Earth and plays out in real time
Shadow of the Hegemon and Shadow Puppets are the most recommended entries after Ender's Game and Ender's Shadow; the series weakens from Shadows in Flight onward

Prequel trilogies — written decades after the originals, with co-author Aaron Johnston:
First Formic War (Earth Unaware → Earth Afire → Earth Awakens, 2012–2014): the original Formic invasion of Earth, set before Ender's birth
Second Formic War (The Swarm → The Hive → The Queens, 2016–2021): the war between the first trilogy and Ender's Game
Read these last, not first — they are written for readers who already know the universe; reading them before Ender's Game significantly diminishes the mystery of the Formics and the weight of the original story

Recommended reading path:
For most readers: Ender's Game → Ender's Shadow (same events, Bean's POV) → Shadow of the Hegemon (Earth aftermath)
For readers who loved the philosophical side of Ender's Game: Ender's Game → Speaker for the Dead
For completionists: read publication order within each sequence; prequels last

First Meetings (short story collection, 2002): contains four stories including "The Polish Boy" (young Ender's father) and "Investment Counselor" (set between Ender's Game and Speaker); optional enrichment for fans of the main series

The twist: Ender's Game has a major reveal in its final act — it is one of the most discussed twists in science fiction; going in without foreknowledge is strongly recommended; this is a book worth reading without googling first
Author note: Orson Scott Card has made widely publicized statements opposing same-sex marriage; readers should be aware of this before engaging with his work; the novels themselves do not reflect these views explicitly
Slug: /reading-orders/enders-game


15 Caraval Reading Order (Stephanie Garber)

---

TIER 2 — Within 3 Months (15 reading order pages)
Strong search volume, genuine reading order complexity

16 Green Bone Saga Reading Order (Fonda Lee)

17 Old Kingdom / Sabriel Reading Order (Garth Nix)

18 Gentleman Bastard Reading Order (Scott Lynch)

19 Brent Weeks Reading Order (Brent Weeks — Night Angel & Lightbringer)

Two complete series in entirely separate worlds — no connection between them:
Night Angel Trilogy (3 books, complete): The Way of Shadows → Shadow's Edge → Beyond the Shadows — grimdark assassin story, Kylar trains under wetboy Durzo Blint, ka'kari shadow-absorption magic
Lightbringer (5 books, complete): The Black Prism → The Blinding Knife → The Broken Eye → The Blood Mirror → The Burning White — color-based magic system, drafters use chromaturgy (solidified light), each color has different properties and psychological effects
A Prism can draft all colors — there is one per generation; the political and religious consequences drive the entire Lightbringer plot
Night Angel is shorter, darker, and more character-driven — better entry if you want grimdark
Lightbringer is more ambitious in scope with one of the most praised hard magic systems in the genre — better entry if you want intricate world-building
Drafting costs the drafter their sanity and lifespan — the stakes of magic use are built into the system
Slug: /reading-orders/brent-weeks

20 John Gwynne Reading Order (John Gwynne)

21 Horus Heresy Reading Order (Dan Abnett)

22 James Islington Reading Order

23 R.F. Kuang Reading Order

24 Riftwar Cycle Reading Order (Raymond E. Feist)

30 novels published 1982–2013 — one of the longest-running fantasy series; the essential entry is always Magician
The setting spans two worlds connected by a magical rift: Midkemia (pseudo-medieval Europe) and Kelewan (feudal Japan-inspired)
Core reading path: Magician → Silverthorn → A Darkness at Sethanon (the Riftwar Saga, 3 books, self-contained)
The Empire Trilogy (co-written with Janny Wurts): Daughter of the Empire → Servant of the Empire → Mistress of the Empire — set on Kelewan, parallel timeline to Riftwar Saga, follows a noblewoman not a mage; often considered equal to or better than the main series; read after Magician
Serpentwar Saga (4 books) and later trilogies (Conclave of Shadows, Darkwar, Demonwar, Chaoswar) continue the universe — quality considered to decline after the core books
The essential Feist experience: Riftwar Saga (3 books) + Empire Trilogy (3 books) — everything beyond that is optional
Magician is sometimes published split into Magician: Apprentice and Magician: Master — the same book in two volumes; either edition works
Slug: /reading-orders/riftwar-cycle


25 Guy Gavriel Kay Reading Order

Roughly 14 novels plus short fiction. No shared universe — every book is set in a different secondary world, and none require prior Kay reading. The through-line is structural, not narrative: Kay writes historical fantasy in which a real historical civilisation (Byzantium, Moorish Spain, Tang Dynasty China, medieval Provence, Viking-era Scandinavia, Song Dynasty China) is transposed into a secondary world with the names changed and a small but real element of the fantastic added. He calls this "one-quarter turn to the fantastic." The fantasy content is deliberately minimal — it is present but never the point. The point is always the human drama, consequence, and what history does to individuals.

No book requires any other. The guide's primary job is to show which civilisation each book is drawn from so readers can navigate by historical interest, then give a clear entry point recommendation.

The works in recommended reading order for the guide:

THE FIONAVAR TAPESTRY (1984–1986) — earliest work, least representative
A Summer Tree → The Wandering Fire → The Darkest Road
Kay's first published fiction, co-written in his head while serving as Christopher Tolkien's assistant on The Silmarillion. Five Canadian university students are summoned to Fionavar, the "first of all worlds," which draws from multiple mythologies (Arthurian, Norse, Celtic). High fantasy in the traditional secondary-world mode — this is the one Kay book that is not historical fantasy. The prose is less controlled than his later work; the mythological borrowings (Lancelot and Guinevere appear directly) are more overt. Complete trilogy, internally dependent — read in order.
Recommend for the guide: start here if the reader wants high fantasy with mythological sweep; flag clearly that it does not represent what the rest of Kay's work is. Most readers who come specifically for Kay's historical fantasy should start elsewhere.

THE SARANTINE MOSAIC (1998–2000) — Byzantium
Sailing to Sarantium → Lord of Emperors
A mosaic artist is summoned from the Rhodian provinces to the gleaming capital of Sarantium to work on the great Sanctuary. Based on 6th-century Byzantium — Valerius II is Justinian, Alixana is Theodora, the city is Constantinople, the Sanctuary is Hagia Sophia. The closest Kay comes to pure historical fiction; the fantastic element is subtle and interwoven with the politics. A two-book duology, internally dependent — read in order.
Often cited as Kay's masterpiece alongside The Lions of Al-Rassan. The guide should describe it as: a novel about art, empire, ambition, and what endures — told through a craftsman who becomes caught in the politics of an imperial court.

LIONS OF AL-RASSAN (1995) — Moorish Spain
Standalone. Three main characters — a Kindath (Jewish) physician, an Asharite (Moorish) soldier, and a Jaddite (Christian) knight — who love each other across the religious fault lines of a world modelled on 11th-century Iberia at the end of the Convivencia. The Reconquista is coming; everybody knows it; nobody can stop it. One of the most emotionally devastating books in the genre. Contains some of Kay's best prose and one of his most discussed endings.
Best entry point for most readers. Tell the guide-writer: lead with the three-character dynamic and the historical basis (the physician is modelled on Maimonides; the soldier on El Cid). Do not spoil the ending. Darkness level: 3 with a crushing emotional climax.

A SONG FOR ARBONNE (1992) — medieval Provence / troubadour culture
Standalone. A world modelled on 12th-century Provence — the courts of love, the troubadour tradition, the conflict between a goddess-worshipping southern culture and a more warlike patriarchal north. A mercenary soldier from the north finds himself drawn into the south's conflict. Kay's most romantic novel in the classical sense — not romantasy, but a book saturated with the culture of courtly love and what it meant. Slightly less devastating than Lions; warmer in register.

THE LAST LIGHT OF THE SUN (2004) — Viking-era Britain
Standalone. A world modelled on 9th-century Britain — the Anglo-Saxons (Anglcyn), the Erlings (Vikings), the Cyngael (Welsh). A raid, a king (modelled on Alfred the Great), and the question of what holds a civilisation together when it is being destroyed from outside. The fantastic element involves the fae of the forest — more present here than in most Kay. Quieter and more elegiac than Lions or Sarantine.

TIGANA (1990) — Renaissance Italian city-states
Standalone. A conquered province has had its very name removed from human memory by a sorcerer-king — no one outside the province can hear, speak, or remember the word "Tigana." The survivors are fighting not just for political freedom but to have their home exist again in the world's memory. Widely considered alongside Lions and Sarantine as Kay's top tier. The premise is among the most inventive in the genre.
Kay's most politically complex standalone and the one most concerned with the cost of resistance. Darkness level: 4. Often recommended as the second read after Lions.

THE UNDER HEAVEN / RIVER OF STARS / A BRIGHTNESS LONG AGO duology/standalone (Tang/Song Dynasty China and Renaissance Italy):
Under Heaven (2010) — Tang Dynasty China (An Lushan Rebellion period). A man returns from two years burying the dead at a remote mountain pass and is given 250 Sardian horses by a Kitan princess — a gift so valuable it immediately becomes a political weapon. Slower opening than most Kay; the world is the most fully realised of his career.
River of Stars (2013) — same world as Under Heaven, 400 years later (Song Dynasty period). Standalone — no shared characters, no prior reading required. A woman who would have been a warrior in an earlier era and a poet-official navigate a declining empire.
A Brightness Long Ago (2019) — a world modelled on 15th-century Italy. A man near the end of his life recounts his youth and the two larger-than-life figures — a mercenary commander and a courtesan — who shaped it. The most structurally experimental of Kay's recent work; the narrator knows how the story ends and tells the reader so, which changes what the reading is.
Children of Earth and Sky (2016) — same world as Sarantine Mosaic, ~200 years later. Can be read without the duology but rewards prior familiarity.

ALL THE SEAS OF THE WORLD (2022) — same world as Lions of Al-Rassan and Children of Earth and Sky
Two characters hired to assassinate a religious leader find themselves caught in the political and spiritual consequences of what they do. Set in the same world as Lions but 100+ years later — no overlapping characters. Can be read standalone; Lions readers will recognise the world's history.

Connections between books (critical for the guide):
Independent worlds: Fionavar, Lions of Al-Rassan/Song for Arbonne/Last Light (these three share a world loosely), Tigana, Sarantine Mosaic/Children of Earth and Sky/All the Seas of the World (these share a world), Under Heaven/River of Stars, A Brightness Long Ago.
The "Peninsular World" (Lions, Song for Arbonne, Last Light, All the Seas): these share the same secondary world — the Al-Rassan peninsula, Arbonne, the northern kingdoms, the Sarantine Empire — and events in one affect the history referenced in others. However none require prior reading. Guide should note the shared world without making it sound like a required read order.
The "Sarantium World" (Sarantine Mosaic, Children of Earth and Sky, All the Seas of the World): share the same world across different eras. Reading the Sarantine Mosaic first adds depth to the later books but is not required.

Entry point recommendation for the guide:
Best first read: Lions of Al-Rassan — the most emotionally immediate, the historical basis (Reconquista/Convivencia) is widely known enough to give context without research, and the three-character dynamic is the best introduction to how Kay structures his novels.
Second read: Tigana or The Sarantine Mosaic, depending on whether the reader wants standalone or duology.
Fionavar last — or skip if the reader is not interested in mythological high fantasy. It will read as a lesser version of what Kay later became.

Kay's register — what to tell the reader in the description:
His prose is formal, measured, and emotional without being sentimental. He writes about historical tragedy from a position of deep sympathy — these are books about people in the path of forces larger than themselves, and Kay gives them dignity without pretending they can win. The fantasy element is always small: a dream, a ghost, a moment of second sight. It is there to remind the reader that this is not historical fiction — that the people feel more rather than less because the world has a little more strangeness in it than ours. The darkness is primarily emotional, not violent. Kay readers come back for the endings, which are consistently among the most affecting in the genre.

Darkness level: 3–4 across all works. No explicit content. Minimal romance heat (present but not the focus). Violence is present but not graphic. The weight is always emotional.

Slug: /reading-orders/guy-gavriel-kay


26 Jennifer L. Armentrout Complete Reading Order

Large, interconnected body of work — 50+ novels across multiple series, with significant crossover between them. The core challenge of this guide is that Armentrout's universes overlap: characters from one series appear in others, events reference each other, and reading order within and across series matters more than for most authors. The guide's primary job is to sort this clearly and honestly for a reader standing in front of her backlist for the first time.

Armentrout writes primarily romantasy and paranormal romance — the emotional engine is always the romantic relationship, the genre wrapping varies (fae, demons, aliens, Greek mythology, dark academia). She also writes under the pen name J. Lynn for her contemporary romances, which share no universe with the fantasy works.

THE MAJOR UNIVERSES — list these as separate groups in the guide:

LUX UNIVERSE (2011–ongoing) — the entry point for most readers
Paranormal/sci-fi romance. Daemon Black is an alien (Luxen — beings of light) living in a small West Virginia town, posing as human. Katy Swartz moves next door. The romance is the genre's beloved enemies-to-lovers slow burn; the alien mythology is more developed than most paranormal romance.
Reading order within the Lux universe:
Core Lux series (must read in order): Obsidian → Onyx → Opal → Origin → Opposition
Lux novellas (read between the books they correspond to): Shadows (before Obsidian — Dawson/Beth), Oblivion (Obsidian from Daemon's POV — optional but popular), Outtakes from the Lux series (after Opposition)
Covenant series (same universe, different mythology — Greek gods): Half-Blood → Pure → Deity → Apollyon → Sentinel
The Covenant series is set in the same world but predates Lux in internal chronology. Characters cross over — Alex Andros appears in Lux books; Daemon references events from Covenant. For new readers: start with either; Lux is more accessible. For completionists: Covenant first, then Lux.
Origin series (Lux spinoff): The Problem with Forever, Frigid, Scorched — lighter contemporary/paranormal; connected but standalone.

FROM BLOOD AND ASH UNIVERSE (2020–ongoing) — current primary readership driver
Dark romantasy. Poppy is a Maiden (a sacred vessel, chosen by the gods, forbidden from touch or emotional attachment) in a kingdom that worships the Ascended (vampiric nobles). Hawke is her guard. The world is more fully built than Armentrout's earlier work; the mythology is more complex; the series is longer.
This is Armentrout's biggest current series and the one most readers encounter first via BookTok.
Reading order (strict — heavy internal dependencies):
From Blood and Ash (FBaA) → A Kingdom of the Wicked → A War of Two Worlds → A Shadow in the Ember → A Light in the Flame → A Fire in the Flesh → A Soul of Ash and Blood → A Fate Carved in Starlight (novella) → A Dream of Gods and Monsters (upcoming)
Note: A Shadow in the Ember begins the Prequel/Nyktos arc — set earlier in the timeline, different protagonists (Seraphena and Nyktos), but essential context for events in the main Poppy arc from book 4 onward. The guide must explain this clearly: books 1–3 are Poppy/Hawke; books 4 onward in the prequel arc run parallel to the main series. Most readers recommend reading the prequel arc as published (i.e., after FBaA book 3, before FBaA book 4+) rather than in strict internal chronology.

DARK ELEMENTS SERIES (2013–2014) — paranormal romance
Gargoyles and demons. Layla is half-demon, trained by gargoyles to hunt her own kind. Four books: Bitter Sweet Love (novella) → Stone Cold Touch → Every Last Breath → Till Death. Standalone universe, no crossover with Lux or FBaA.

WAIT FOR YOU UNIVERSE (2013–ongoing) — contemporary romance (J. Lynn pen name)
Not fantasy. Contemporary new adult romance. Avery Morgansten transfers to college trying to escape her past; Cam Hamilton is her neighbour. Eight novels in the Wait for You universe, all loosely connected with character crossovers. Include in the guide but flag clearly as contemporary romance, no fantasy elements.

WICKED UNIVERSE / THE WICKED TRILOGY (2014–2016)
Urban fantasy romance. Ivy Morgan is a member of the Order — a secret organisation hunting the Fae. Set in New Orleans. Three books: Wicked → Torn → Brave. Standalone universe.

DARK ELEMENTS / HARBINGER / OTHER STANDALONES:
Several additional series (Harbinger, the Titan series as a Covenant spinoff, the Flesh and Fire series as FBaA world expansion) that the guide should list with brief descriptions and connection notes.

Titan series (Covenant universe spinoff): Set after the Covenant series; follows Seth. Seth → The Return → The Power → The Struggle → The Prophecy. Requires Covenant series first.

ARMENTROUT'S READING ORDER COMPLEXITY — what the guide must address directly:
The FBaA universe is the most complex: the prequel arc (Shadow/Light/Fire series) is set before FBaA but was published after, and reading it in internal chronological order rather than publication order spoils major reveals from the main series. Publication order is strongly recommended — the guide should state this plainly.
The Lux/Covenant crossover: characters appear in each other's series. Not reading both leaves gaps; but either works as a standalone entry.
The J. Lynn contemporary novels share no universe with the fantasy work — some readers don't realise this.

Entry point recommendations:
New to Armentrout, wants romantasy: From Blood and Ash — the current flagship, the most developed world, the biggest community.
New to Armentrout, wants lighter paranormal romance: Obsidian (Lux #1) — fast, fun, iconic enemies-to-lovers; the book that built her original fanbase.
Already read FBaA, wants more: A Shadow in the Ember (the prequel arc) or Wicked (different world, different register — urban fantasy).
Not sure about fantasy: Wait for You (contemporary) — test her voice and pacing without the mythology.

Content notes (essential for this guide — her readership specifically looks for this):
FBaA universe: explicit sexual content (Explicit/Spicy tier), graphic violence, dark themes including captivity and non-consensual elements in early books; darkness level 4. The "dark romantasy" label is accurate.
Lux/Covenant: Open Door to Explicit sexual content; moderate violence; darkness level 3.
Wicked series: Open Door sexual content; urban fantasy violence; darkness level 3.
Wait for You: Closed Door to Open Door; contemporary romance content notes vary by book; darkness level 2.
Romance heat level is the primary reader decision point — the guide's content section must be specific about this across each universe.

Slug: /reading-orders/jennifer-armentrout


27 Vlad Taltos Reading Order (Steven Brust)

20+ books (ongoing since 1983) — human assassin Vlad Taltos navigating a society built by and for Dragaerans, a near-immortal species who consider humans second-class
Publication order strongly recommended — do not read chronologically (Taltos the novel is set early in Vlad's life but was written 5th and assumes prior knowledge)
Publication order: Jhereg → Yendi → Teckla → Taltos → Phoenix → Athyra → Orca → Dragon → Issola → Dzur → Jhegaala → Iorich → Tiassa → Hawk → Vallista → Lyorn → (ongoing)
Each novel is named after a Dragaeran House — Jhereg is the entry point, not the chronological beginning
Vlad's familiar Loiosh is a jhereg (small telepathic flying reptile) — their snarky dynamic is one of the great fantasy partnerships
Witchcraft (Eastern/human magic) vs sorcery (Dragaeran Amorphia-based) — two separate magic systems with different rules and social status
Books are deliberately short (200–300 pages) — the series rewards cumulative weight read in order
Athyra (book 6) breaks the first-person POV — told from outside Vlad's perspective; readers should know this before reaching it
The Khaavren Romances: 5 books in the same world 500+ years earlier, written in Dumas pastiche style — separate experience, not required for Vlad Taltos
Slug: /reading-orders/vlad-taltos


28 Demon Cycle Reading Order (Peter V. Brett)

5-book grimdark fantasy — humanity besieged by demons (corelings) that rise from the ground every night, destroyed only by combat wards
The Warded Man → The Desert Spear → The Daylight War → The Skull Throne → The Core
Three concurrent POV storylines converge across the series: Arlen (the tattooed fighter), Leesha (the healer), Rojer (the musician)
The Desert Spear introduces Jardir — the same events as book 1 retold from the antagonist's POV; readers need to know this before picking it up
Novellas: Brayan's Gold and Messenger's Legacy flesh out Arlen's backstory — best read between books 1 and 2
The UK title for book 1 is The Painted Man (same book, different cover/title)
Series quality peaks in books 1–3; books 4–5 are widely considered a step down in focus and pacing
Slug: /reading-orders/demon-cycle


29 Powder Mage Reading Order (Brian McClellan)

Two complete trilogies set in the same world, plus short fiction. Written by Brian McClellan, who was Brandon Sanderson's student and later his writing assistant — the Sanderson influence is visible in the magic system design and the military plotting, but McClellan is his own writer with his own preoccupations. The world is gunpowder-era fantasy: flintlock muskets, cannon, professional armies, and a magic system built directly around gunpowder.

The magic system — the defining element of the series, lead with it in the guide:
Powder Mages can control gunpowder with their minds. Specifically: they can ignite powder at a distance, accelerate bullets mid-flight to sniper-range accuracy, or detonate powder reserves to devastating effect. They are military weapons. The Privileged (traditional finger-wiggling sorcerers drawing on an elemental force called the Else) are the old aristocratic magic; Powder Mages are the new democratic one — they tend to come from the lower classes, they work by skill and instinct rather than inherited training, and the aristocracy fears them.
A third type — the Knacked — have minor passive abilities (never needing sleep, perfect memory, reading emotions) that are not combative but affect the political texture of the world.

THE POWDER MAGE TRILOGY (2013–2015) — read first, always
Promise of Blood → The Crimson Campaign → The Autumn Republic

Promise of Blood (2013):
Field Marshal Tamas has led a coup against the king of Adro, executed the nobility, and freed his country from aristocratic rule — in the first chapter. The book opens in the aftermath of the revolution, not during it. Three POVs: Tamas himself managing the coup's consequences; his son Taniel, a legendary powder mage and veteran, trying to find his feet in a post-war world; and Adamat, a retired police inspector with a perfect memory hired to investigate what the dying king whispered as he was executed ("You can't break Kresimir's Promise"). The mystery thread and the political thread and the military thread run simultaneously. Strong opening novel — the world is established fast and the magic system is demonstrated through action, not explained. Darkness level: 4.

The Crimson Campaign (2014):
The coup has destabilised the region and a foreign empire is invading. Tamas is separated from the city and fighting a desperate rearguard action with no supply lines; Taniel is on a mountain with a powder mage marksman mission that becomes something much stranger; Adamat is pursuing his investigation into the gods while his family is in danger. The middle book of a military fantasy trilogy — scope expands, stakes escalate. McClellan is better than most at keeping all three threads urgent simultaneously. Darkness level: 4.

The Autumn Republic (2015):
The conclusion. The military, political, and divine threads converge. The "gods" element — introduced slowly — becomes central in the final book. McClellan pays off the promise of the opening chapter. One of the cleaner trilogy conclusions in military fantasy. Darkness level: 4.

Short fiction within the Powder Mage world (published between trilogy books):
The short story collection "Promise of Blood" (Tor.com stories) — "The Girl of Hats and Needles," "The Powder Mage," "Forsworn," "Servants of the Crown," etc. These expand side characters and background. Not essential for the trilogy but add texture. The guide should note they exist without making them sound required.

GODS OF BLOOD AND POWDER TRILOGY (2017–2019) — read after the original trilogy
Sins of Empire → Wrath of Empire → Blood of Empire
Set ten years after the original trilogy, in a different country (the Dynize Empire has invaded the Dynize colony of Landfall). Mostly new cast; Ben Styke — a legendary cavalry officer who was imprisoned, tortured, and left for dead by the old government — is the breakout character and the series' emotional engine. Michel Bravis is an intelligence agent working inside the occupation. Lady Flint (a character from the original trilogy) appears as a major POV.

Ben Styke is why readers cite this trilogy as equal to or better than the original. He is a one-man army whose personal reputation as "Mad Ben Styke" has taken on a life of its own — enemies flee at his name, allies are afraid of him, and he is entirely aware of both. McClellan uses him to ask what violence does to a person across a lifetime of it. Darker and more character-focused than the original trilogy.
Cannot be fully appreciated without the first trilogy — events, factions, and character histories from the original trilogy are referenced extensively. Read in order.

Connections and reading order for the guide:
Read the original trilogy first (Promise of Blood → Crimson Campaign → Autumn Republic).
Short fiction can be read any time alongside the trilogy — flag where each story is set relative to the main books.
Gods of Blood and Powder after the original trilogy — the guide should note these are widely considered at minimum equal to the originals, and that Ben Styke is many readers' favourite McClellan character.

What to flag in the description:
McClellan writes military fantasy with genuine tactical intelligence — the battles are planned, the logistics matter, the professional soldiers think like professionals. This is closer to Bernard Cornwell than to Tolkien. The magic is combat-oriented and spectacular without being physics-defying — gunpowder manipulation is physically grounded and the rules are clear. The political intrigue is real: the coup in book one is not a backdrop, it's a sustained question about what revolutions cost and who pays.

Comparable series to mention: Mistborn (Sanderson — shared sensibility around magic system design, similar political complexity, McClellan acknowledges the influence); The Black Company (Cook — military unit perspective, similar unglamorous view of war); The Blade Itself (Abercrombie — morally complex soldiers, similar darkness level).

Darkness level: 4 across both trilogies. No romance heat. Violence is sustained and tactically detailed. No explicit content.

Slug: /reading-orders/powder-mage


30 Chronicles of Amber Reading Order (Roger Zelazny)

Ten novels in two five-book cycles, published 1970–1991. Complete, standalone from all other Zelazny work. No prior reading required, no sequels planned or possible (Zelazny died in 1995).

The premise — lead with this in the guide's description because it is the hook:
Amber is the one true world; all other worlds, including Earth, are Shadows — imperfect reflections of Amber cast by those with the ability to walk between realities. The royal family of Amber can walk through Shadow, shifting reality around them as they move, until they reach any world they can imagine. This means every genre, every history, every mythology is potentially accessible to them. The series uses this to move through radically different registers — high fantasy, spy thriller, noir, metaphysical philosophy — across its ten books.

The structure:
THE CORWIN CYCLE (Books 1–5, 1970–1978) — read first, in order
Nine Princes in Amber → The Guns of Avalon → Sign of the Unicorn → The Hand of Oberon → The Courts of Chaos

Nine Princes in Amber (1970):
Corwin wakes in a private hospital on Earth with amnesia. Someone has been suppressing his memory. He is, it gradually emerges, one of the princes of Amber — immortal, with the ability to walk Shadow — and his brothers and sisters have been fighting a succession war for the throne of Amber while their father Oberon has been missing. Corwin reassembles his identity and enters the conflict. The amnesia opening is a deliberate technique: it gives the reader the world-building in the order Corwin recovers it, which is faster and less disorienting than it sounds. One of the most propulsive opening novels in fantasy — lean, fast, noir-inflected, no scene-setting. Around 200 pages.
The series is written entirely in first-person; Corwin's voice is the texture of everything. Ironic, precise, slightly world-weary — he is thousands of years old and has done most things before.

Books 2–5 continue Corwin's story through escalating stakes — the nature of Amber, the Pattern (the design at the heart of reality that gives the royal family their powers), the Courts of Chaos (the opposing metaphysical extreme to Amber), and the identity of the enemy are all progressively revealed. Do not summarise individual books extensively in the guide — just note that the five books form one complete story and must be read in order.

THE MERLIN CYCLE (Books 6–10, 1985–1991) — read after, in order
Trumps of Doom → Blood of Amber → Sign of Chaos → Knight of Swords → Prince of Chaos

Follows Merlin, Corwin's son — half Amber, half Courts of Chaos — working as a computer programmer in San Francisco (this is the early 1980s) while surviving repeated assassination attempts. The Merlin Cycle is more science-fiction adjacent, more metafictional, and more structurally complex than the Corwin Cycle. Widely considered weaker than the first five books — the plot is more convoluted, the resolution less satisfying, and Zelazny was ill during the writing of the final book, which shows. The guide should note this honestly without dismissing the cycle: it expands the cosmology significantly and Merlin is an interesting character.
Cannot be read without the Corwin Cycle — it directly continues events and characters. Read in order.

Standalone short fiction (not essential for the guide but note they exist):
Zelazny wrote several Amber short stories collected in "The Collected Stories of Roger Zelazny" — these are completionist material. No impact on the main reading order.

A note on format — important for the guide:
The Corwin Cycle books are short by modern standards: Nine Princes runs ~175 pages, the others 200–250 pages. The entire ten-book series is shorter than a single Sanderson novel. Frame this as an asset: the series is fast and can be read in a week. Readers who bounce off 800-page epics often become devoted Zelazny readers because he trusts the reader to keep up without hand-holding.

What to say in the description:
Zelazny is a prose stylist in a genre that often isn't — he came up through science fiction's New Wave in the 1960s and brought a literary compression to fantasy that was unusual at the time and remains unusual. Corwin's narration is laconic and precise; the world-building is delivered through action and inference rather than exposition; the cosmological ideas (Shadow, the Pattern, the Courts of Chaos, the nature of identity across infinite realities) are genuinely philosophical without ever stopping the story to explain themselves. Chronicles of Amber is the foundational text for the "multiverse as setting" strand of fantasy and science fiction — Michael Moorcock's Eternal Champion is the other pole, but Zelazny's approach is more intimate.
Comparable series: The Long Earth (Terry Pratchett/Stephen Baxter — Shadow-walking as a concept, though different in register); The Dark Tower (King — the Tower/Amber as the axis of all worlds is a direct parallel and King has cited Zelazny); Moorcock's Elric/Eternal Champion (the other great 1970s multiverse fantasy).

Darkness level: 3 across both cycles — violence is present but not graphic; the register is adventure-fantasy with philosophical depth rather than grimdark. No explicit content. No romance heat. The darkness is cosmic and existential rather than visceral.

Flag in the guide: the Merlin Cycle's relative weakness compared to Corwin. Most readers consider books 1–5 among the great works of the genre and books 6–10 interesting but flawed. The guide should manage expectations honestly so readers who love the Corwin Cycle aren't blindsided by the shift.

Slug: /reading-orders/chronicles-of-amber


---

TIER 3 — Long Term (13 reading order pages)
Lower volume but builds authority and captures dedicated niche audiences

52 Sun Eater Reading Order (Christopher Ruocchio)

7-book planned series (6 published): Empire of Silence → Howling Dark → Demon in White → Kingdoms of Death → Ashes of Man → Disquiet Gods → (book 7 TBA)
Hadrian Marlowe narrates his own history in retrospect — he knows he becomes the most important and most terrible person in human history; the dramatic irony runs from page one
Far-future setting: the Sollan Empire is feudal in structure (lords, serfs, inherited power) with faster-than-light travel forbidden by the chantry — ships travel via FTL but it's suppressed as heresy
Humanity has been at war with the Cielcin (Pale) for centuries — ancient, incomprehensible, terrifying aliens; the war's true nature is one of the series' slowly revealed mysteries
Deliberately and consciously influenced by Gene Wolfe's Book of the New Sun — readers who loved New Sun will recognize the debt; it is not derivative, it is in conversation
Strong Greco-Roman and Stoic philosophy themes throughout — Hadrian reads and quotes classical literature, and the series is structured around a classical moral question: what makes someone a monster
Each book is long and dense — not fast-paced; rewards patient readers; the payoff is cumulative
The series is among the most ambitious ongoing sci-fi/fantasy works currently being published
Slug: /reading-orders/sun-eater


53 Broken Earth Reading Order (N.K. Jemisin)


54 Elric Saga Reading Order (Michael Moorcock)

8 books (plus additional stories) — one of fantasy's foundational anti-hero series; Elric of Melniboné is an albino emperor kept alive by drugs and the soul-drinking black sword Stormbringer
Stormbringer is the series' central artifact: a cursed weapon that feeds on the souls of those it kills, including people Elric loves; the sword gradually corrupts and destroys its wielder
Publication order recommended: Elric of Melniboné is the entry; Stormbringer is the devastating, inevitable finale
The Eternal Champion concept: Elric is one face of Moorcock's multiverse-spanning Eternal Champion who appears across all his fiction (Corum, Dorian Hawkmoon, etc.) — reading across the wider Eternal Champion is optional but rewarding
Foundational influence: D&D's alignment system (Law vs Chaos) drew heavily from this series; George R.R. Martin cites Elric as a direct influence; the anti-hero template in modern fantasy traces here
The core saga is relatively short — 6–8 slim novels; the entire series can be read in a few weeks
The books read as episodic tragedy — each entry advances the slow destruction of Elric's world, relationships, and self; readers should expect no redemptive arc
Slug: /reading-orders/elric-saga


55 Shadows of the Apt Reading Order (Adrian Tchaikovsky)

56 Gene Wolfe / Book of the New Sun Reading Order (Gene Wolfe)

57 Artemis Fowl Reading Order (Eoin Colfer)

8-book complete series: Artemis Fowl → The Arctic Incident → The Eternity Code → The Opal Deception → The Lost Colony → The Time Paradox → The Atlantis Complex → The Last Guardian
Artemis Fowl II: a 12-year-old criminal genius who discovers the existence of an underground fairy civilization (LEPrecon police, dwarves, centaurs, demons) and immediately tries to exploit it
Unlike most YA and middle-grade: Artemis starts as a genuine villain — he kidnaps a fairy officer and ransoms her — the moral complexity is the hook; the series is about his slow, reluctant humanisation
Holly Short (LEPrecon captain) is co-protagonist from book 1 — the interplay between her and Artemis drives the series
Clear internal continuity — read in order; each book builds on established relationships and technology
Skews younger (12+) but with sharp wit and more sophisticated plotting than typical middle-grade; adults enjoy it without embarrassment
The series grows darker and more emotionally complex across the later books
A Disney+ adaptation exists but departs significantly from the books — worth noting for readers coming from the show
Slug: /reading-orders/artemis-fowl


58 Xanth Reading Order (Piers Anthony)

45+ books (ongoing) — one of the longest-running single-author fantasy series; each human born in Xanth has exactly one unique magical talent, no duplicates
Set in Xanth, a magical land shaped like the state of Florida; the books are comedic, pun-heavy, and episodic
First three books form the original trilogy: A Spell for Chameleon → The Source of Magic → Castle Roogna — the only essential reads
The first book is the real entry point; subsequent books are largely standalone and don't require reading in order
Quality considered to plateau significantly after the first trilogy; books 1–10 or so are the most commonly recommended
The series is notoriously pun-dense — a feature for some readers, a dealbreaker for others; the humour is groan-adjacent throughout
Best positioned for younger readers or adults seeking lightweight, whimsical escapism — not comparable in tone to most of this list
Slug: /reading-orders/xanth


59 Saga of Recluce Reading Order (L.E. Modesitt Jr.)

22+ books (ongoing) spanning thousands of years of Recluce history — internal chronology and publication order differ significantly; many books stand alone
Magic system: Order vs Chaos — a fundamental duality governing all reality; Order mages (black) and Chaos mages (white) can detect, manipulate, and be corrupted by the imbalance
Standard entry: The Magic of Recluce (book 1 in publication order) — follows Lerris, a young order-mage; a solid, complete story and the most recommended starting point
Alternative entry for experienced fantasy readers: Magi'i of Cyador (chronologically earliest in the world) — a more politically complex story
The books are quieter and more philosophical than typical epic fantasy — each tends to follow one protagonist across their life arc with a strong emphasis on craft, consequence, and earned competence
Magic has costs and limits that are rigorously maintained — power is never free; the system rewards thoughtful engagement
Most books are self-contained per protagonist — the cast doesn't carry over much, though lore and world events connect them over time
Best for readers who want thoughtful, character-driven fantasy with a consistent world and a slow-burn pace; not recommended as a first fantasy series
Slug: /reading-orders/saga-of-recluce


60 Chronicles of Thomas Covenant Reading Order (Stephen R. Donaldson)

10 books across three series: First Chronicles (3) + Second Chronicles (3) + The Last Chronicles (4)
First Chronicles: Lord Foul's Bane → The Illearth War → The Power That Preserves
Second Chronicles: The Wounded Land → The One Tree → White Gold Wielder
The Last Chronicles: The Runes of the Earth → Fatal Revenant → Against All Things Ending → The Last Dark
Thomas Covenant is a leper in the real world who is transported to the Land — a vivid, impossibly beautiful fantasy world — and refuses to believe any of it is real
The white gold of his wedding ring is the most powerful wild magic in the Land; Covenant refuses throughout to accept or use it
The protagonist is intentionally and radically unsympathetic in the opening of book 1 — this is not an accident; readers who expect a likeable hero will be badly wrong-footed
The Land itself is one of the most fully realised fantasy worlds in the genre — beauty, ecological depth, and wonder are central even as Covenant rejects them
Hugely influential: George R.R. Martin cites Donaldson directly; the series extended what a fantasy protagonist could be
Not for everyone — relentlessly dark, philosophically dense, demanding — but widely considered one of the genre's great works by readers who stay with it
Slug: /reading-orders/thomas-covenant


61 Rivers of London Reading Order (Ben Aaronovitch)

9 main-series novels (ongoing), plus a substantial body of novellas and short fiction. Urban fantasy set in contemporary London — specifically the Metropolitan Police Service. PC Peter Grant is a probationary constable who witnesses a ghost giving a witness statement at a murder scene, which gets him seconded to the Folly: the one-man department (plus one apprentice) responsible for policing magic in the UK. His boss is Detective Chief Inspector Thomas Nightingale, the last registered wizard in England, who has been doing this since the 1930s and is very tired.

The series is first-person, narrated by Peter — mixed-race (Sierra Leonean mother, jazz musician father), curious, sarcastic, deeply interested in the architecture of London and the engineering of magic. His voice is the entire texture of the books. If it doesn't click by chapter two of book one, it probably won't.

Series structure:
Main novels (read in publication order — each builds on the last):
1. Rivers of London (UK) / Midnight Riot (US) — 2011
   Peter witnesses a ghost, gets drafted to the Folly, meets Nightingale and Molly (the Folly's housekeeper, who is something else entirely), and is introduced to the rivers of London — the river gods and their families, who are London's genius loci and have opinions about their territory. The first case involves a possessing spirit splitting between two warring personalities in 18th-century London. The case structure is procedural; the worldbuilding density is high and introduced without pause. Start here, no exceptions.

2. Moon Over Soho — 2011
   Peter investigates jazz musicians dying of a mysterious condition while Nightingale recovers from injuries sustained in book one. Introduces the concept of vestigia (the magical residue objects and places absorb from significant events). The series finds its second gear here — the worldbuilding deepens and the supporting cast expands.

3. Whispers Under Ground — 2012
   An FBI agent joins the investigation into a murder in the London Underground tunnel network. First appearance of the Faceless Man — the series' primary antagonist, a rogue wizard operating well outside Folly oversight. The underground London element (rivers, tunnels, secret stations) is central.

4. Broken Homes — 2013
   Centres on a Brutalist housing estate in South London. The Faceless Man storyline escalates significantly. Ends with a development that genuinely changes the series' stakes — do not read spoilers. Widely cited as the moment the series becomes something larger.

5. Foxglove Summer — 2014
   Peter is sent out of London — to rural Herefordshire — to investigate missing children. A deliberate change of register: quieter, weirder, more fairy-tale adjacent. The Folly lore expands in new directions. Some readers find it slower; others consider it the best book in the series for atmosphere.

6. The Hanging Tree — 2016
   Lady Ty (the River Thames's daughter, a recurring presence since book one) calls in a favour. Peter navigates Folly politics, old-money London magic families, and the continuing Faceless Man arc. The worldbuilding of the wider magical community — the Pale Lady, the Chestnut Man — expands.

7. Lies Sleeping — 2018
   The Faceless Man arc reaches its conclusion. The book pays off threads running since book three. Do not start here.

8. False Value — 2020
   Peter has left the Met and is working undercover at a tech company. A deliberately different setup that widens the series' scope beyond London. The Folly continues operating in the background.

9. Amongst Our Weapons — 2022
   Peter investigates a mysterious killer connected to the English Civil War and the history of witchfinder culture. Returns to the main London procedural register.

Novellas and short fiction — where they fit:
The novellas are set in the same world and some expand significant side characters. The most important:
- The October Man (2019): standalone novella set in Germany, following a German equivalent of Peter working for the Bundeskriminalamt's magic division. Can be read any time after book 4. Introduces the wider European magical enforcement world.
- Amongst Our Weapons companion novellas: several shorter pieces set during the main series; completionists only; read as published.
- The short story collections (various): Aaronovitch has published short fiction across multiple anthologies; not essential.
The novellas are clearly labelled as Folly-adjacent rather than main series — the reading order guide should distinguish main novels from novellas without making the novellas sound skippable entirely (The October Man in particular has genuine standalone merit).

The Faceless Man arc: the overarching mystery of who is operating outside the Folly's oversight, building something using old magic and new money. Runs books 1–7, resolved in Lies Sleeping. The books from 8 onward are a new phase rather than a continuation of that arc — flag this in the guide so readers who bounce off the first few books understand that the early series has a defined shape.

The London element: Aaronovitch is a Londoner and the books function partly as a guided tour of London's geography, history, and mythology — the rivers (Fleet, Tyburn, Effra, Lea) as actual divine entities with personalities shaped by their catchment areas; the architecture as a record of magic; the social geography (South London vs North London, the river families' territories) as a plot element. Readers who know London get additional texture; readers who don't will still find it rich.

The magic system: Peter approaches magic like an engineer — he tries to understand the physics of it, runs experiments, takes notes. Aaronovitch describes the system in terms of Newtonian mechanics applied to vestigia and forma (the shapes wizards impose on magic). It is internally consistent and gets more complex as Peter's training progresses. The formal magic system is slow to appear in book one — Peter spends most of the early books learning to do a single light spell.

Nightingale: the other pole of the series. A 1930s public school wizard who fought in WWII, survived things that killed everyone around him, and has been running the Folly alone for decades. His backstory is revealed gradually — Aaronovitch does not dump it. He is one of urban fantasy's best supporting characters precisely because the reader always senses there is more than he's saying.

Tone: procedural police novel + London mythology + nerdy engineering magic + dark undercurrent. The comedy is dry and built into Peter's narration — it is not a comedy, but it reads funnier than most books that are trying to be funny. The darkness is real: the Faceless Man arc goes to genuinely dark places, the war history is heavy, and Aaronovitch does not always protect his characters.

Comparable series to name in the guide for reader orientation: The Dresden Files (urban fantasy detective, but tonal opposite — Peter is drier, more grounded, less mythology-shaped); Felix Castor (Mike Carey — London-set supernatural investigator, closer in register); Laundry Files (Charles Stross — British government supernatural bureaucracy, similar dry institutional humour).

Darkness level: 3 overall, 4 during the Faceless Man arc's later books. No explicit content. Violence is present and occasionally significant.

Slug: /reading-orders/rivers-of-london


62 Which Epic Fantasy Series Should You Start?

Sanderson vs Jordan vs Erikson vs Abercrombie vs Martin
Difficulty ratings, time commitment, darkness ratings
Decision matrix based on what you want
Slug: /reading-orders/which-epic-fantasy-series


63 Fantasy Standalones — No Reading Order Needed

Best fantasy novels requiring zero series commitment
Piranesi, Circe, Goblin Emperor, Spinning Silver, etc.
Slug: /reading-orders/fantasy-standalones


64 Fantasy Series Ranked by Length & Commitment

Every major series with total page count, estimated reading time
Sorted: quick reads (trilogies) → mid-length (5-7 books) → epic commitment (10+)
Helps readers decide what to start based on available time
Slug: /reading-orders/fantasy-series-by-length

65 Drenai Saga Reading Order (David Gemmell)

12 books, complete series (Gemmell died 2006). Not a sequential epic — more a collection of interconnected standalone novels set in the same world across different eras, sharing recurring characters, bloodlines, and the fortress of Dros Delnoch.
Entry point: Legend (1984) — the series masterpiece and the correct place to start. All other books can be read in publication order or by sub-series after this.
Sub-series within Drenai:
Druss the Legend (3 books): Legend → The First Chronicles of Druss the Legend → The Legend of Deathwalker — the iconic aging warrior across his full arc; Legend shows him old, The First Chronicles shows him young; read Legend first regardless
Waylander (3 books): Waylander → Waylander II: In the Realm of the Wolf → Hero in the Dark — an assassin seeking redemption; a darker, more personal arc than Druss; publication order
Skilgannon the Damned (2 books): White Wolf → The Swords of Night and Day — a warrior from a later Drenai era; connected to the Druss mythology; read after Legend
Standalone Drenai: The King Beyond the Gate, Quest for Lost Heroes, Winter Warriors, Morningstar — each largely self-contained; any order after Legend

The premise of Legend: the fortress of Dros Delnoch — six walls across a mountain pass — is the last defence between the Nadir horde and the Drenai homeland. It is undermanned, crumbling, and going to fall. Druss the Legend, the greatest warrior of the age, is sixty years old and has come out of retirement to die there. The book is not about whether the fortress can be held but about what it means to hold it anyway.
Gemmell's origin: he wrote Legend while awaiting biopsy results he was certain would confirm terminal cancer; he imagined himself as the defenders of the fort. The cancer was a misdiagnosis. The book was already done.

Core themes across the series: what makes a hero is not victory but the willingness to stand; courage is not the absence of fear; the aging warrior who still shows up; sacrifice as the only honest answer to impossible odds. These themes run every book without variation — this is not a weakness but the whole point.
Book length: short by modern standards — most run 200–350 pages; the series is an easy, fast read and designed for re-reading.
The Nadir: the recurring antagonist civilization, a steppe people led periodically by great warlords; not portrayed as a monolithic evil — individual Nadir characters are developed with complexity across multiple books.

Gemmell's other work (not Drenai):
Jon Shannow trilogy (Wolf in Shadow → The Last Guardian → Bloodstone): post-apocalyptic Western fantasy — Earth after geological catastrophe; a gunslinger-like protagonist in a world that has half-forgotten its own history; a cult series, unconnected to Drenai
Rigante series (4 books, complete): Celtic-inspired historical fantasy — Rome vs. a Highland people; closer to historical fiction than sword-and-sorcery
Troy trilogy (Lord of the Silver Bow → Shield of Thunder → Fall of Kings, the last co-written by his wife after his death): myth-deflated retelling of the Trojan War; Helikaon (Aeneas) as protagonist; excellent standalone historical fantasy
These can be read any time — no Drenai knowledge required.

Slug: /reading-orders/drenai-saga


66 Deverry Cycle Reading Order (Katharine Kerr)

15 books, complete series. Welsh-Celtic inspired fantasy built around a reincarnation engine: the same souls are reborn across centuries, carrying unresolved wyrd (fate/debt) from life to life, with each book moving simultaneously through a present-day storyline and past-life flashbacks that explain how the current situation came to be.
Read in strict publication order — there is no shortcut. The structure is cumulative; the past-life sequences only make sense in the order they are revealed.

Entry: Daggerspell (1986) — introduces Nevyn, an 11th-century mage who swore a reckless oath ("I'll never take a wife until I set this wrong right, and may the gods witness it — never, if it takes a thousand years") that bound him and three other souls into an endless cycle of reincarnation. What Nevyn thinks will take a decade takes centuries. The series follows him across those centuries.

Sub-series (all part of one continuous story — not standalone):
The Deverry quartet (books 1–4): Daggerspell → Darkspell → The Bristling Wood → The Dragon Revenant — Nevyn's core arc; the reincarnation structure is established; the past-life sequences become the emotional engine of the present-day plot
The Westlands sequence (books 5–9): A Time of Exile → A Time of Omens → Days of Blood and Fire → Days of Air and Darkness → The Red Wyvern — the world expands significantly; the Westlands and the elven peoples become central; tone darkens
The Dragon Mage arc (books 9–12): The Red Wyvern → The Black Raven → The Fire Dragon (overlaps with and expands the end of the Westlands arc) — dragons enter the story as characters, not backdrop
The Silver Wyrm sequence (books 12–15): The Gold Falcon → The Spirit Stone → The Shadow Isle → The Silver Mage — the full resolution of every soul-debt established in book one; Kerr wrote the conclusion to close the cycle completely

The reincarnation structure: past-life chapters are set in different centuries and follow different characters who share the same souls. These are not flashbacks in a conventional sense — they are parallel narratives set hundreds of years apart that only gradually reveal their connection to the present. On first read, the past-life sections can feel like interruptions; by book two or three, they are what readers most want to return to. The structure is Kerr's primary achievement and unlike anything else in the genre.
Dweomer: the magic system — Welsh-derived, intuitive rather than mechanical; based on the concept of wyrd (a word covering fate, debt, and the consequences that follow unresolved actions across lifetimes); practitioners are called dweomerworkers; magic is earned through spiritual development rather than raw power

Welsh influence: the world of Deverry is directly modelled on early medieval Wales — the political structure (a tanist system of succession), the language (Deverrian reads like Old Welsh), the place names, the social codes. Readers with knowledge of Welsh history will recognise the bones of it immediately; others will absorb it through context.
Investment required: this is a 15-book cycle with a complex structure that rewards readers who commit. Readers who finish it consistently cite it as one of the most emotionally satisfying long fantasy series in existence. The first book is the slowest — the payoff scales across the full cycle.

Slug: /reading-orders/deverry


67 Riyria Revelations Reading Order (Michael J. Sullivan)

Core series: 6 books, complete — but most commonly sold and read as 3 omnibus editions: Theft of Swords (books 1–2) → Rise of Empire (books 3–4) → Heir of Novron (books 5–6). Either format is fine; the omnibus editions are the intended experience.
Entry: Theft of Swords / The Crown Conspiracy (book 1) — two thieves-for-hire, Royce and Hadrian, are framed for a murder they didn't commit; the tone is lighter than most epic fantasy, comedic at times, with a buddy-duo dynamic that carries the series.

The Riyria universe (read in this order):
Riyria Revelations (6 books, core): the main story — read first, no exceptions; the prequels spoil backstory and character reveals that land best as surprises
Riyria Chronicles (prequels, 4+ books ongoing): The Crown Tower → The Rose and the Thorn → The Death of Dulgath → The Disappearance of Winter's Daughter — origin stories for Royce and Hadrian; read after finishing the Revelations; ongoing, Sullivan adds to this series
Legends of the First Empire (6 books, complete, separate era): Age of Myth → Age of Swords → Age of War → Age of Legend → Age of Death → Age of Empyre — set thousands of years before the Revelations in the same world; a full epic fantasy arc with a different cast; read after both Riyria series or as a separate entry point for readers who prefer larger-scale epic fantasy

The key reading order mistake: readers who discover the Chronicles first and read them as prequels before the Revelations lose significant dramatic payoff from the main series. Publication order (Revelations first) is the correct order regardless of internal chronology.

Royce and Hadrian: the duo dynamic is the series' engine. Royce is a cynical, darkly skilled thief; Hadrian is a former soldier with a conscience and a moral code Royce finds inconvenient. The banter is the point — this is comfort epic fantasy built on a partnership.
Tone: lighter than most of this list — accessible, fast-paced, not grimdark; readers who bounce off brutal epic fantasy often find this an easier entry into the genre; readers who want moral complexity and darkness may find it too clean
The twist architecture: Sullivan plants information across the Revelations that only resolves in book 6; re-reading after finishing the series is notably rewarding

Slug: /reading-orders/riyria


68 The Sword of Truth Reading Order (Terry Goodkind)

Core series: 11 books — Wizard's First Rule → Stone of Tears → Blood of the Fold → Temple of the Winds → Soul of the Fire → Faith of the Fallen → Pillars of Creation → Naked Empire → Debt of Bones → Chainfire → Phantom → Confessor
Extended universe: Children of D'Hara (5 novellas, sequel), The Nicci Chronicles (4 books, ongoing spinoff following Nicci), Heart of Black Ice / The Children of D'Hara omnibus — the expanded universe is for committed fans of the main series only
Read the 11 core books in publication order — the story is continuous and each book builds directly on the last.

The honest series summary: Wizard's First Rule is one of the most gripping opening novels in epic fantasy — a fully self-contained adventure with a clean ending that works as a standalone. The series extends across 10 more books of variable quality. Faith of the Fallen (book 6) is widely cited as the series peak — a prison-break / utopia-collapse story with the sharpest writing Goodkind ever produced. The Chainfire trilogy (books 9–11) concludes the arc but is considered the most difficult stretch. Many readers recommend stopping at Confessor and treating the Children of D'Hara content as optional.

Richard Cypher / Richard Rahl: a woods guide who discovers he is the Seeker of Truth — a role with specific magical and political weight in the Midlands; the character's arc from ordinary man to world-shaping figure runs all 11 books
Kahlan Amnell: the Mother Confessor, one of a line of women whose touch compels absolute devotion; her power makes intimacy impossible with ordinary men and defines the central romance
The Confessors: a female order who function as a combination of judge and law enforcement; their touch destroys a person's identity and replaces it with total devotion; the ethical and political implications are developed across the series
The villain: Darken Rahl, then Emperor Jagang — the series rotates antagonists but the underlying conflict is always tyranny vs. individual will; Goodkind is explicit about the Objectivist philosophy running through the later books, which readers either find galvanising or exhausting
Debt of Bones: a prequel novella set before book 1 — read after book 2 or at the end of the series; not required

Quality note worth including in the guide: the series is considered to peak around books 1 and 6 and decline in the later Chainfire arc; readers should know this going in rather than discovering it at book 9.

Slug: /reading-orders/sword-of-truth


69 The Belgariad Reading Order (David Eddings)

Two complete quintet series plus two companion novels — all 12 books written by David and Leigh Eddings:
The Belgariad (5 books): Pawn of Prophecy → Queen of Sorcery → Magician's Gambit → Castle of Wizardry → Enchanter's End Game
The Malloreon (5 books, direct sequel): Guardians of the West → King of the Murgos → Demon Lord of Karanda → Sorceress of Darshiva → The Seeress of Kell
Companion novels: Belgarath the Sorcerer → Polgara the Sorceress — backstory for the two most beloved supporting characters; read after finishing both quintet series, not before

Read The Belgariad first, then The Malloreon — the second series follows directly from the end of the first with the same cast. The companion novels are rewards for readers who have already committed; they spoil the outcomes of both quintet series.

The premise: Garion, a farm boy raised by his aunt Pol, discovers his lineage is at the centre of a prophecy that has been building for seven thousand years. The Belgariad is the archetypal chosen-one epic fantasy — mythic scale, a long journey through interconnected kingdoms, a mentor figure (Belgarath, the world's oldest sorcerer), and a final confrontation that the world itself has been moving toward.
Why it holds up: Eddings wrote both series with his wife Leigh (credited only posthumously on later editions); the characterisation of the ensemble — particularly Belgarath and Polgara — is warm, witty, and unusually good for 1980s epic fantasy; the banter is the series' real achievement
The structure: each book is short by modern standards (250–300 pages); the Belgariad reads as one continuous story across five volumes; pacing is brisk, never padded
The Malloreon: wider cast, some new nations introduced, the same tone; considered slightly weaker than the Belgariad by most readers but a satisfying conclusion; do not read it before finishing the Belgariad

Related Eddings work (same world, different era):
The Elenium (3 books): The Diamond Throne → The Ruby Knight → The Sapphire Rose — a Crusades-inflected chivalric fantasy, older protagonist (Sparhawk, a knight rather than a farm boy), darker tone; standalone and unconnected to the Belgariad world but same authorial voice; read after the Belgariad/Malloreon or as a separate entry point
The Tamuli (3 books): direct sequel to the Elenium — same relationship as Malloreon to Belgariad

Slug: /reading-orders/belgariad


70 The World of the Five Gods Reading Order (Lois McMaster Bujold)

Unusual structure: three full novels (each featuring a different protagonist) that can be read in any order, plus eleven Penric and Desdemona novellas with their own internal chronology. The novels share a world and a theology but not a cast.

The three novels (read in any order — each is standalone):
The Curse of Chalion (2001): a retired soldier takes a position in a royal household and becomes entangled in a curse that has corrupted the ruling family across generations; the most grounded and politically dense of the three; widely considered the best entry point
Paladin of Souls (2003): sequel to Chalion in the sense of sharing the same world and some characters, but follows a different protagonist — a middle-aged widow who undertakes a religious pilgrimage and discovers it is nothing like she planned; Bujold's most character-focused novel
The Hallowed Hunt (2005): set in an earlier era of the same world; a murder mystery with a theological dimension; the most self-contained of the three

The Five Gods theology: the world has five gods (Father, Mother, Son, Daughter, Bastard) who compete for souls and intervene indirectly in mortal affairs through their saints. The theology is deeply embedded in the plot of each book — characters' relationships with the gods are not backdrop but active narrative elements. Bujold uses it with unusual rigour and sympathy.

The Penric and Desdemona novellas (11 as of 2025, ongoing):
Penric's Demon → Penric and the Shaman → Penric's Mission → Mira's Last Dance → The Prisoner of Limnos → Penric's Fox → The Orphans of Raspay → The Physicians of Vilnoc → Masquerade in Lodi → The Assassins of Thasalon → Knot of Shadows
Read in publication order — each builds on the last; Desdemona (a chaos demon inhabiting Penric's body) develops across the series; they are novellas (100–150 pages each) and read quickly
Set in the same world as the three novels but in a different region (Peninsular nations rather than Chalion) and a different era — no required reading before starting Penric; either the novels or the novellas can come first

Entry question: start with The Curse of Chalion for the richest introduction to the world's theology and politics; start with Penric's Demon for a lighter, faster entry; the three novels and the Penric novellas function as two distinct but connected reading tracks

Slug: /reading-orders/world-of-the-five-gods


71 Tortall Universe Reading Order (Tamora Pierce)

Six distinct sub-series set in the same medieval-esque kingdom of Tortall, each following a different protagonist. Every main series follows a woman or girl breaking into a role that was previously closed to her — knight, wildmage, lady knight, spy. The sub-series are independent enough that multiple entry points work, but they reference each other's characters and events.

The sub-series, in approximate in-world chronological order:
Beka Cooper Trilogy (prequel, ~200 years before the main Tortall timeline): Terrier → Bloodhound → Mastiff — Beka is an ancestor of Alanna, working as a city-guard trainee in Corus; grittier and more street-level than the later series; written last (2006–2011) but set earliest; start here only if you prefer in-world chronological order
Song of the Lioness (publication 1983–1988): Alanna: The First Adventure → In the Hand of the Goddess → The Woman Who Rides Like a Man → Lioness Rampant — Alanna disguises herself as a boy to train as a knight; Pierce's debut; the writing is simpler and more compressed than her later work (each book is ~180 pages); widely beloved but shows its age compared to later series
The Immortals (publication 1992–1996): Wild Magic → Wolf-Speaker → Emperor Mage → The Realms of the Gods — Daine, a girl with wildmage powers (she can communicate with and shape-shift into animals), arrives in Tortall; longer and more polished than Song of the Lioness; overlaps in timeline with the latter half of Lioness; many readers consider Wild Magic the stronger entry point to the universe
Protector of the Small (publication 1999–2002): First Test → Page → Squire → Lady Knight — Kel, the first girl to openly train as a page (no disguise), faces institutional resistance and builds a reputation through skill rather than magic; more grounded and slower-burning than Daine's series; widely considered Pierce's best Tortall work
Daughter of the Lioness (publication 2003–2006): Trickster's Choice → Trickster's Queen — Aly, Alanna's daughter, is captured and sold as a slave on the Copper Isles and becomes entangled in a revolution; espionage focus rather than knight-training; requires at least passing familiarity with Alanna to appreciate the character
Numair Chronicles (publication 2017–ongoing): Tempests and Slaughter → (series incomplete) — follows Numair (Daine's companion in The Immortals) as a young student mage; the only main-cast male protagonist; set before the Immortals and shows his background; the series is unfinished

Reading order guidance: start with either Wild Magic (The Immortals book 1) or First Test (Protector of the Small book 1). Wild Magic is the more polished entry to the world; Protector of the Small is the richest series in the universe. Song of the Lioness is the publishing beginning but its shorter page counts and 1983 YA prose are a harder sell for new readers. The Beka Cooper trilogy is best saved for readers who already love the world. Do not start with the Numair Chronicles.

Key world details:
Tortall: a medieval-style monarchy in a world where magic is widespread and varied (divine gifts, beast-magic, mage training, immortal creatures). The gods are present and occasionally intervene. The tone is YA adventure but the series does not shy from war, death, and political corruption — it simply frames them through the lens of young women finding their agency.
Female protagonist through-line: every main series (except Numair) follows a woman or girl in a role previously closed to her. The series is not preachy about this — it is simply the problem each protagonist solves through the course of the books.
Each series stands alone: characters from earlier series appear in later ones (Alanna appears in Protector of the Small; Daine appears in Daughter of the Lioness), but no sub-series requires you to have read another to follow the plot.

Darkness level: light to moderate YA — war, combat deaths, some abuse of power; no explicit content; suitable for age 12+.

Slug: /reading-orders/tortall


72 Red Queen Reading Order (Victoria Aveyard)

A complete four-book series plus prequel novellas and a bridge collection, all set in a world stratified by blood colour: Silvers (aristocracy, superhuman abilities) and Reds (commoners, no powers). The premise inverts when a Red girl is discovered with Silver powers.

Main series (read in order):
Red Queen (2015) — Mare Barrow, a Red thief, is accidentally revealed to have Silver-level lightning powers and is thrust into the Silver court as a cover-up; the central hook is the betrayal at the end of book 1; go in knowing nothing beyond the premise
Glass Sword (2016) — Mare leads a search for other Red-and-Silver anomalies; the pacing is slower and more repetitive than book 1; considered the weakest book by most readers, but necessary for context
King's Cage (2017) — Mare is imprisoned; the perspective widens to include other POVs; darker and more politically dense than the first two
War Storm (2018) — the concluding volume; multiple POVs; the war comes to a head

Prequels — best read after Red Queen, not before:
Queen Song: follows Cal's mother, Queen Coriane, before the events of Red Queen; published in the Cruel Crown collection (2016)
Steel Scars: follows Farley, leader of the rebellion, in the period just before Red Queen begins; also in Cruel Crown
Both novellas are short (~80 pages each) and reward readers who already know the characters rather than serving as cold introductions; read Cruel Crown between Red Queen and Glass Sword, or after War Storm

Bridge content:
Broken Throne (2019): a collection of novellas, short stories, and bonus material set during and after the main series; read after War Storm; completionist material rather than essential narrative

The hook that makes book 1 work: the tagline "anyone can betray anyone" is not marketing copy — it is the book's actual mechanism. The betrayal in Red Queen is what readers remember years later. Avoid spoilers entirely; do not look up character fates before finishing book 1.
Maven Calore: the standout villain of the series; the relationship between Mare and Maven is what drives books 1 and 2 emotionally; the writing around this dynamic is stronger than the worldbuilding or the battle sequences
The series' structural arc: book 1 is the strongest; the series broadens and slows in books 2–3 before pulling together in War Storm; readers who loved book 1 should know the pacing changes rather than discovering it mid-Glass Sword
Tone: YA fantasy with dystopian elements — more Divergent than Throne of Glass in its class-revolution politics; moderate darkness (war, executions, imprisonment, psychological manipulation); no explicit content

Slug: /reading-orders/red-queen


73 Zodiac Academy / Solaria Universe Reading Order (Caroline Peckham & Susanne Valenti)

A complete eight-book adult romantasy series set in Solaria — a Fae world where magic is determined by your zodiac star sign and your Order (the creature form you shift into). Originally self-published by two authors writing together; one of the largest BookTok-driven series to break through to mainstream awareness. Very long, very spicy, deeply addictive once the hook lands.

The world:
Solaria is a Fae realm run by powerful old Houses. Every Fae has two magical identifiers — their star sign (which sets their elemental magic: fire, water, earth, air) and their Order (Dragon, Vampire, Wolf, Siren, Manticore, Pegasus, Griffin, and others). The combination determines their power tier. Above everyone are the Celestial Heirs: four students from the four most powerful Fae families, who together effectively rule Zodiac Academy and, by extension, Solaria.
The throne of Solaria has been empty since the Vega royals disappeared. The Celestial Heirs have quietly claimed that power. The series begins when the lost Vega twins — Darcy and Tory, raised in human foster care with no knowledge of Fae — are discovered alive and brought to the academy, threatening everything the Heirs have built.

Main series — Zodiac Academy (8 books, read in order):
The Awakening → The Ruthless Fae → The Reckoning → The Shadow → The Cursed Fates → The Broken Heir → Heartless Sky → The Awakening as One
Plus: Sorrow and Starlight — an epilogue novella, read immediately after book 8
The series is one continuous story; all eight books are mandatory and must be read in order. Books grow longer as the series progresses (later entries are 700–900 pages).

The dual structure: Darcy and Tory are dual protagonists with separate love interests and largely separate plotlines running in parallel. Darcy's story and Tory's story are both complete within the main series; neither is a side character in the other's arc.
Love interests: Tory / Darius Acrux (Dragon Order, Libra — the most powerful of the four Heirs and the one most hostile to the Vega twins early on); Darcy / Gabriel Orion (a professor — the relationship begins as forbidden and the power imbalance is part of the tension; readers who dislike teacher/student dynamics should know this going in)
The Heirs as antagonists: the four Celestial Heirs (Darius, Caleb Altair, Seth Capella, Max Rigel) are introduced as the series' bullies — powerful, entitled, and actively trying to break the twins. The enemies-to-lovers arc is central to the series; how long it takes to get there is part of what the early books are about. Do not skip the early cruelty; the payoff is built on it.

Extended Solaria universe — read after completing the main series:
Companion series (same timeline, Heirs' perspective): the events of the main series retold from the four Heirs' POV — recommended for readers who want the inside view of the antagonists' heads; best started after the main series rather than interspersed, so that both readings have full context
Darkmore Penitentiary (spin-off, 3 books): follows different characters in a Fae maximum-security prison; darker in register than the main series; standalone enough to approach after finishing Zodiac Academy but benefits from knowing the world and its politics

Content note: this is adult fantasy with explicit sexual content throughout, not YA. The academy setting is misleading — tone and content are firmly adult. Early books contain sustained bully dynamics and power imbalance; later books escalate darkness significantly (deaths, war, high stakes). Readers sensitive to bully romance should know books 1–3 lean into it before the dynamic shifts.

Reading pace note: the first book (The Awakening) is the shortest; many readers describe the hook as slow to catch and the reading experience as suddenly compulsive around book 2 or 3. The series has a strong reputation for becoming unputdownable once you are in — accounts of "I read five books in a week" are common. The slow start in book 1 is load-bearing rather than a sign of the series' quality.

Slug: /reading-orders/zodiac-academy
---

## Notes for Claude Code

### Page structure (every reading order page)
- Series name + author + total books + estimated reading hours
- Darkness progression (does it get darker across the series?)
- Core vs Optional vs Extra labels per book
- "Safe starting point" section
- Publication order vs chronological order (only where they differ)
- Spoiler-free notes
- "Finished? Find books like [Series]" → internal link to Books Like page
- Related reading orders (3 links at bottom)

### Priority slugs to build first
```
/reading-orders/cosmere
/reading-orders/mistborn
/reading-orders/stormlight-archive
/reading-orders/acotar
/reading-orders/throne-of-glass
/reading-orders/wheel-of-time
/reading-orders/first-law
/reading-orders/malazan
/reading-orders/asoiaf
/reading-orders/grishaverse
```

### SEO note
Reading order pages rank faster than Books Like pages.
Less competition, more specific intent, reader is already committed.
Target keyword always in first sentence:
"The [Series Name] reading order matters because..."

---

## Reading Order Banner Image Prompts (AI Generation)

Style guide for all banners:
- Photorealistic cinematic fantasy digital art
- Dramatic atmospheric lighting, strong contrast between dark shadows and vibrant focal light
- No text, no legible writing anywhere in image
- No clearly visible character faces (implied presence, silhouettes, or backs only)
- Square crop (1:1), approximately 800×800px output
- Mood-first: each image should feel like the series before you know what it is

### Need banners — prompts below

